
STOP 



Early Journal Content on JSTOR, Free to Anyone in the World 

This article is one of nearly 500,000 scholarly works digitized and made freely available to everyone in 
the world by JSTOR. 

Known as the Early Journal Content, this set of works include research articles, news, letters, and other 
writings published in more than 200 of the oldest leading academic journals. The works date from the 
mid-seventeenth to the early twentieth centuries. 

We encourage people to read and share the Early Journal Content openly and to tell others that this 
resource exists. People may post this content online or redistribute in any way for non-commercial 
purposes. 

Read more about Early Journal Content at http://about.jstor.org/participate-jstor/individuals/early- 
journal-content . 



JSTOR is a digital library of academic journals, books, and primary source objects. JSTOR helps people 
discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content through a powerful research and teaching 
platform, and preserves this content for future generations. JSTOR is part of ITHAKA, a not-for-profit 
organization that also includes Ithaka S+R and Portico. For more information about JSTOR, please 
contact support@jstor.org. 



THE CLASSICAL WEEKLY 



THE ELEriENTS OF THE TRANSLATION 
OF LATIN 1 

To say that adequate translation is difficult and 
perfect translation impossible is perhaps only an- 
other way of saying that translation belongs to the 
company of the arts, all aiming at an unattainable 
end, all "armed", as Stevenson puts it, "with a tube 
of superior flake-white to paint the portrait of the 
insufferable sun I" Certainly the difficulty of trans- 
lation is closely bound up with its inexhaustible 
interest. One may try again and again, as all its 
amateurs know, year after year, constantly better- 
ing one's translation, yet as far as ever from com- 
plete satisfaction. 

The question might reasonably be raised why an 
art so difficult as the translation of Latin into Eng- 
lish should be attempted as early in education as 
we do attempt it. Yet the question after all is an 
idle one, for difficult as it is to use translation in 
the earlier years of the study of the language, it 
would probably be more difficult still to dispense 
with it. What needs to be clearly distinguished 
here is the immense difference between our own 
difficulties and problems as translators of Latin and 
the difficulties of a young student still engaged in 
learning the language. It is a difference not only 
of extent, but of kind. 

For in the first place, mature minds judge and 
criticize translations as wholes. Matthew Arnold, 
in his essay On Translating Homer easily con- 
demned all existing translations by the use of a few 
adjectives. This translation is not rapid in its 
movement, that is not noble in its style, he said, 
and it was idle to urge that this or that detail of 
the original had been faithfully reproduced. Even 
leaving out of sight the more subtle questions of 
style, and considering translation merely as the ren- 
dering of one language into another, adequate 
translation is one long process of sacrifice, com- 
promise and adaptation, the sacrifice of the part to 
the whole, of the letter to the spirit. Now this 
whole is for us, of course, the Latin original. That 
is the real thing of which our translations seem 
only shadowy and distorted reflections. With a 
young student just beginning to learn to read, the 
case is reversed. It is the original which he sees 
in a glass darkly, through the medium of his own 
translation. The original does not exist for him as 
a substantive thing, but as a collection of fragments 
out of which he may piece together his translation. 
There is, besides, something in a young mind which 
makes the parts seem greater than the whole, some- 
thing which cannot see the forest for the trees, 

1 This paper was presented at the meeting of the Classical 
Association of the Middle States and Maryland, at New York, 
April Z7, 1907. 



which finds untruth in any substitute or compro- 
mise, and must have the letter or mis.s the spirit. 
So that at the outset the student is doubly hampered 
as regards translation, by this youthful literalism 
and by his imperfect perception of the original. I 
am speaking not of what ought to be, but of 
what is. 

Nothing is easier than to tell a student of Latin, 
even the youngest, exactly how to proceed in trans- 
lation. He does not go wrong for lack of good 
advice. These directions, often very cleverly and 
tellingly put, seem almost pathetic, if one succeeds 
in taking, even partially, the student's point of view. 
The words are true, absolutely true, true as Cas- 
sandra's warnings to the Trojans, and sometimes 
quite as useless. "Read the Latin first without 
translating" they generally begin. Ah yes, if they 
could do that at the outset, this difficulty and many 
another would be at an end. Ordinary boys and 
girls, left to themselves, translate words. If that 
does not seem to answer, they translate as much 
of the syntax as is absolutely necessary, treating the 
order as a mere impediment. To get their point 
of view, one must look at syntax, order, and vocab- 
ulary as separate elements in the translation prob- 
lem. Obviously the special phase of that problem 
presented by Latin to English speaking people is 
this: on the one hand we have a rather inflexible, 
but clear, logical and consistent syntax, a curiously 
limited vocabulary and the freest possible order, on 
the other a loose and flexible syntax, a vocabulary 
embarrassed by its own riches and a somewhat rigid 
word-order, in which many places have been as it 
were preempted for purposes of syntax. 

Let us then consider syntax first as an element 
in translation. In that continual sacrifice of the 
parts to the whole which makes translation, no sac- 
rifice is more necessary or common or profitable 
than that of the outward form and body of the 
syntax. When Livy says, for example, "Angebant 
ingentis spiritus virum Sicilia Sardiniaque amissae", 
no mature mind would object to the translation 'It 
was torture to the towering pride of the man that 
Sicily and Sardinia had been lost', though every 
word has undergone a grammatical change, for no 
law of syntax has been broken, no grammatical 
meaning altered. Few would prefer as a trans- 
lation 'The loss of Sicily and Sardinia distressed 
the proud-spirited man', where somewhat closer re- 
semblance in syntax is gained at the cost of order 
and emphasis. Still fewer would choose 'Sicily and 
Sardinia, having been lost, distressed the man of 
proud spirit', where the syntax is imitated in detail 
at the cost of almost everything else worth hav- 
ing. It is only too obvious that in the translation 
of Latin the syntax requires very great freedom of 



THE CLASSICAL WEEKLY 



treatment, a freedom of which our young student 
is at first incapable. He is capable of taking great 
liberties with the syntax, of disregarding it alto- 
gether, of trampling it underfoot, but this complete 
freedom of handling combined with absolute re- 
spect for the essential meanings and relations of 
syntax is at first beyond him. Such syntax as 
he observes and takes account of he tends to repro- 
duce literally in translation. The effect on his 
translation is wholly unfortunate. Here is one 
great source of the Latin English that we all know 
and deplore, the Latin English so deliriously ridi- 
culed in the story Concerning a Youth who was un- 
able to lie, attributed to Professor Lane of Harvard. 
But after all is not a sound instinct at work here? 
Can any sort of freedom be conferred or acquired 
all at once? Are not lawlessness and mental con- 
fusion the alternative of this early literalism, rather 
than freedom? The danger of this lawlessness 
in the early years of Latin study seems one of the 
most serious dangers we have to meet. I do not 
believe that it can be exaggerated, or that it is fully 
appreciated. A false idea is prevalent that we 
know very little English grammar and nevertheless 
get on extremely well without it. We may indeed 
know very little consciously, and in all probability 
learned very little in school, But the fundamental 
things in English syntax, all of us, literate and 
illiterate, learned in our infancy. We learned for 
example a great many words which exist in Eng- 
lish for the purpose of expressing relations between 
other words. We learned many combinations of 
order, which have for us an irresistible grammat- 
ical meaning. Much of this we can carry over and 
use more or less unconsciously in modern lan- 
guages. But Latin goes about these things so 
differently that a whole new set of mental habits 
has to be formed. Until they are to some extent 
formed, nothing else seems of equal consequence, 
not even better translation. To understand the 
ultimate horror of the state of mind that threatens 
our students, we must imagine that in English 'You 
will die', and 'They are dead' meant at first sight very 
much the same thing, that in the sentence 'Cain 
killed Abel' the reader relied mainly on his knowl- 
edge of Biblical history to determine who was the 
murderer, that all our adjectives and pronouns had 
to be distributed and applied b" general appropriate- 
ness alone. To get the simpler and more funda- 
mental facts of syntax recognized, observed, acted 
upon is .one of the greatest early difficulties, espe- 
cially with young Americans, who can not conceive 
of a rule or law as ever seriously intended to im- 
pede or control action. Now we all know how 
much of the difficulty or ease of learning a construc- 
tion depends on its translatability. Why else should 



so simple a matter as the agreement of the gerun- 
dive be a constant stumbling-block? Why else 
must we carefully teach that parcere for example, 
is followed by the dative, while cedere looks out for 
itself, so to speak ? We all know the persistency 
with which young students, with the facts staring 
them in the face from the printed page, will still 
parse from their translations. As long, then, as 
mental confusion exists in connection with any par- 
ticular construction the confusion may easily be 
confounded by free translation. But as soon as 
its essential meaning is so thoroughly mastered 
that it is recognized under any disguise, freedom in 
translation, so far as that construction is concerned, 
is not only possible but distinctly desirable. To take 
a simple example, the useful and common expedient 
of rendering an active by a passive construction 
can be safely allowed only when the confusion con- 
cerning the voice of verbs is well at an end. Thus 
the student must work out his freedom bit by bit, 
point by point, steadily but gradually. If we check 
his literal tendencies before the time, we shall be 
"drawing a circle premature, greedy for quick re- 
turns of profit", and our bargain will indeed be a 
bad one, even as regards translation. For trans- 
lation worthy the name presupposes power to read, 
and power to read is impossible without this prac- 
tical grasp of syntax. 

I have already touched upon the point that a 
great deal of our manipulation of syntax in Latin 
comes from a desire to retain the order. For we 
all recognize in the Latin freedom of order a ver- 
itable gift to the language, one that helps out its 
deficiencies in all sorts of ways and in particular 
lends a constant element of beauty to what might 
otherwise have been a somewhat rigid and unlovely 
language. In reading we depend on the order,; 
we get all sorts of hints, sidelights and suggestions 
from it. In translation, we earnestly and some- 
times despairingly endeavor to reproduce its effects 
in English, learning incidentally a great deal about 
English order and the many devices by which our 
own language has striven to escape the bondage of 
a fixed order. Even for young students reading 
in the order is perfectly possible under direction. 
But the distinction between reading and translation 
is not clear to them, and, when they are left to 
themselves, such approaches to reading as they 
make tend to set aside the Latin order as merely 
troublesome and irrational. They want an order 
that will translate. We know the concessions that 
used to be made to this weakness in the ordo that 
was furnished, in poetry, at least, in our grand- 
fathers' time. Another difficulty is that the chil- 
dren have at first no conscious knowledge of Eng- 
lish order, only a set of instincts. Mental habits 



THE CLASSICAL WEEKLY 



which they do not understand hold them fast. It 
is like wrestling with a phantom. If the student, 
with commendable docility, is making an effort to 
read in the order, he tends to translate in it. For 
an example of the very complex and to him mys- 
terious difficulties that may be encountered here, we 
need not go beyond the first chapter of Caesar. 
Gaul, we learn there, is divided into three parts, 
'one of which the Belgae inhabit' (here the object 
precedes the verb and the subject, but so it natur- 
ally does in English), 'another the Aquitani' (here 
the object may precede, but with some sense of 
difficulty), 'the third they who are called Celts 
in their own tongue, Gauls in ours' (here the or- 
der in English is quite forced and almost impos- 
sible). Yet the three clauses are perfectly sym- 
metrical in structure. It is only by translation 
that we discover such facts as these about the order 
of modifiers in English, that we may speak of a 
densely crowded street, but not of a crowded with 
people street, or that, having aliae multae and 
magnae as modifiers of the same virtutes, we must 
say 'many other great' in English, no other ar- 
rangement being possible. No wonder our young 
students abandon the attempt to reproduce the or- 
der. Yet they must not abandon it, for the Latin 
order can be retained in translation, and must be 
retained in most cases if the translation is not 
to suffer. It may even be retained surprisingly 
often without altering the form of the syntax. 'Be- 
hind the rider sits black Care', 'Fine gratitude you 
are showing to the Roman people', 'Down fall the 
pine trees', 'This I pray, this last cry I pour out 
with my blood', are but a few random instances out 
of many where English shows itself tractable. 
However, the usual condition of reproducing the 
Latin order in translation without violence to Eng- 
lish is the free handling of syntax previously re- 
ferred to. As that becomes more and more pos- 
sible with the student's increasing knowledge, the 
order may more and more be kept. This is of 
course a wonderful gain to the translation itself and 
also a great stimulus to reading in the order. 

I have kept the consideration of word meanings un- 
til the last, though it is the first point that engages 
the young student's attention. His devotion to his 
vocabulary is even excessive, yet his efforts bear 
singularly little fruit, and nowhere is he more in 
need of guidance. The difficulty here arises from 
the comparative smallness of the Latin vocabulary 
and the consequent necessity for considering every 
word not as a separate unit but in relation to all 
the context. Nothing more directly forces the stu- 
dent to the effort, at first unwelcome, of consid- 
ering a sentence as a whole. The fact that Latin 
gives us comparatively few words to memorize is 



not appreciated by the young student. Very gladly, 
if consilium might only be always 'plan', would they 
memorize additional words for advice and purpose 
and strategy and diplomacy and all the little army 
of English words which consilium represents. It 
requires an intelligent comparison of the two lan- 
guages to see that consilium does always mean some- 
thing like planning, but that English calls this plan- 
ning by different names according to the circum- 
stances under which it is done, while Latin contents 
itself with one, trusting to the context to make '.ts 
application clear. A boy is very unlikely to make 
this discovery unassisted. What he desires at first 
is not the essential meaning of the Latin word at 
all, but a convenient English tag to attach to it. 
The trouble with consilium is that the English tags 
are so numerous, invidia, the fear of which so 
possesses Cicero's imagination in the Catilines, not 
only may but must be translated in various places 
unpopularity, hostility, criticism, disfavor, reproach. 
It is a real feat for a young mind to recognize es- 
sential similarity in these different and not alto- 
gether synonymous words. And what of the cases 
where there is not any English tag to attach? what 
of versari and afficere? What most of all of the 
many cases where the translation word is not the 
meaning, all those metaphors not at home in English 
for which some different expression must be substi- 
tuted? The natural early desire not to stop over 
the essential meaning, but to take the shortest cut 
to an English equivalent has been, I must believe, 
strengthened by the fact that Caesar's vocabulary 
is the first the student encounters; it is used now in 
most beginning books. The immediate gain in 
economy of effort is doubtless great, and the prac- 
tice probably justifiable; yet it is a pity to get a 
technical vocabulary first, to make the acquaintance 
of ponere in the sense of pitching a camp, to have 
one's first Latin sentences full of legions, cohorts, 
fortifications and military manoeuvers, objects and 
operations more or less misty and remote. For this 
sense of unreality in regard to the Latin words 
cripples translation doubly, by putting yet another 
hindrance in the way of real reading of the Latin. 
For what reading wants of a word is the real 
meaning, not an English word at all; what transla- 
tion wants is the English word which will convey 
that meaning under the given circumstances, often 
not a translation of the word at all. 

In secondary school work this difficulty reaches 
an acute stage in Vergil, that is, if it has not been 
successfully dealt with before that. Even then 
Vergil offers the best opportunity for distinguish- 
ing essential meanings from translation equivalents, 
or, if one looks at it in another way, the greatest 
danger of confounding the two. His intolerance 



THE CLASSICAL WEEKLY 



of anything commonplace or hackneyed in diction, 
his desire for words and metaphors that will bite 
and tell are carried to a point that would be harsh- 
ness in prose. This characteristic of Vergil has 
not been even remotely imitated in any translation 
that I know. In school translations everything 
tends to be smoothed away, blurred and effaced. 
Tennyson uses words as Vergil does when he writes 
of "breasting the blows of circumstance", or speaks 
of trees as "clothing their branchy bowers with fifty 
Mays", or writes "Climb thy thick noon, disastrous 
day". Imagine commonplace expressions substi-* 
tuted for all these unusual ones. Yet this is what 
happens to Vergil in our schools. So that here, 
if not before, the essential meaning must be insisted 
upon as something distinct from a translation sub- 
stitute. Here, if not before, we must know that 
petere means aim at and ponere set down. Once 
interested in the essential meaning of Latin words, 
the variation of that meaning by context and the 
possibilities of expressing it in English, one is well 
started on one of those happy roads that never come 
to an end. Which of us is not still trying to get 
a better rendering for some particular studium or 
virtus, and still hoping to find precisely the right 
expression some day? When one's students set out 
upon this quest, one gets a strong sense of intel- 
lectual comradeship with them. 

It seems, then, that the whole process of learning 
to translate Latin is a gradual and progressive liber- 
ation of the mind, in which realities emerge and 
detach themselves from what is accidental or unim- 
portant in their outward form. The student be- 
gins in a kind of mental bondage, partly to the 
literalism inseparable from youth, partly to his own 
language, whose forms and habits are identical to 
him with thought itself. But when he has learned 
to translate Latin even as well as he may, under 
favorable conditions, in our schools, when he has 
learned to treat syntax freely but never lawlessly, 
to accept and find at last rational and helpful a thing 
at first so repellent to his unconscious instincts ns 
Latin order, and to recognize by constant compari- 
son of the Latin and the English vocabulary that 
all words are more or less unsuccessful attempts 
to express thought, he has gone a long way toward 
mental enfranchisement, he is to a certain extent 
at least the master and not the slave of language. 
When by a growing power to read he comes to see 
his original clearly, he feels increasing dissatisfac- 
tion with his own attempts to copy it, and I know 
of nothing more hopeful for English work than 
the intensity of effort to which translation, as it 
were, provokes and challenges the more intelligent 
students. 

Little has been said about ways and means. Prob- 



ably, as Kipling said of tribal lays, "there are nine 
and sixty ways" of teaching translation and "every 
single one of them is right". But I venture to say 
that no one of the sixty-nine can be applied with 
the best effect without the constant effort to put 
one's self mentally in the student's place and to 
guide him along, without pausing, it is true, but 
also without haste or impatience. 

Ella Catherine Greene 
The Baldwin School, Bryn Mawr 



REVIEWS 



Euripides and the Spirit of His Dramas. By Paul 
Decharme, translated by James Loeb. New 
York: The Macmillan Co. (1006). Pp. xxii 
+ 392- $300. 

The late Professor Decharme's Euripide et 
L'Esprit de son Theatre (1893) is widely known 
among students of Euripides. This analysis of 
Euripides' temperament, intellectual tendencies and 
dramatic work rests on a more profound study of 
the dramas themselves than has characterized any 
that preceded it. 

Though to the most tragic of poets the Athenians 
themselves and posterity alike have granted but the 
third place among Greek tragedians, his work has 
been more widely read, studied and discussed than 
that of any other Greek dramatist and in a sense 
his plays are popular to-day. At the present time 
the psychology of the Euripidean dramas appears to 
interest the cultivated public more than the perfec- 
tion of Sophocles or the grandeur of Aeschylus. 
Attacks on his art and morals are no longer in fash- 
ion; Professor Decharme points out that it is 
equally absurd to criticize him for the innovations 
in the construction of his dramas and for his philo- 
sophic attitude toward the myths about the Olym- 
pians which constituted the popular religion of his 
day. 

Euripides and Socrates both were accused of cor- 
rupting the young and of teaching atheism. Plato 
interpreted Socrates for the after-world in such 
fashion that he has come to connote almost perfect 
goodness and wisdom. Euripides was' less fortunate ; 
he had as his exponent not the great philosopher but 
Aristophanes, the greatest genius that ever wrote 
comedy, advocatus diaboli indeed in his case as in 
that of Socrates. 

Professor Decharme deplores the fact that the 
Aristophanic judgment of Euripides has still too 
wide currency even among those who love the 
tragic poet. This book shows abundantly how in 
these latter days Euripides has come into his own 
after the period in which bitter vituperation of 
him was in fashion in Germany (with the great 
exception of Goethe) and in other lands where Ger- 



